EXODUS 5

1  Now after this Moses and Aaron went and spoke to Pharaoh, “Thus says the Lord God of Israel: ‘Let My people go, so they may hold a feast to Me in the desert.’”
2  Then Pharaoh said, “Who is He, that I should obey His voice to let Israel go? I do not know the Lord, nor will I let Israel go.”
3  So they said, “The God of the Hebrews has called us to Him. Let us go three days’ journey into the desert and sacrifice to the Lord our God, lest at any time death or slaughter happen to us.”
4  Then the king of Egypt said to them, “Why, Moses and Aaron, do you take the people from their work? Get back to your work.”
5  Again Pharaoh said, “Look, the people of the land are many now, so let us not give them rest from their work.”
6  So the same day Pharaoh commanded the taskmasters of the people and their clerks, saying,
7  “You shall no longer give the people straw to make bricks as yesterday and the day before. Let them go and gather straw for themselves.
8  Furthermore, you shall lay on them a daily quota of bricks they are to do each day. You shall hold them to it. You shall not reduce it, for they are loafers; therefore they cry out, saying, ‘Let us go and sacrifice to our God.’
9  Let the labors of these men be oppressive and cause them anxiety; and let them not pay attention to empty words.”
10  So the taskmasters of the people and their clerks went out and spoke to the people, saying, “Thus says Pharaoh: ‘I will not give you straw.
11  Go, get it yourselves wherever you can find it; yet nothing will be reduced from your workload.’”
12  The people were then dispersed throughout all the land of Egypt to gather stubble for straw.
13  The taskmasters also forced them to hurry, saying, “Fulfill your daily quota of work as when straw was given you.”
14  Also the clerks from the race of the children of Israel, whom Pharaoh's taskmasters set over them, were beaten and questioned, “Why have you not fulfilled your task in making bricks both yesterday and the day before, and also today?”
15  Then the clerks of Israel's sons entered and cried out to Pharaoh, saying, “Why are you dealing thus with your servants?
16  No straw is given your servants, and they say to us, ‘Make bricks!’ and indeed, your servants are beaten, but the fault is with your own people.”
17  But he said, “You are loafers! You are loafers! Therefore you say, ‘Let us go and sacrifice to the Lord.’
18  Now therefore, go and work; for no straw shall be given you; yet you shall deliver the quota of bricks.”
19  So the clerks from the children of Israel saw they were in trouble after it was said, “You shall not reduce any bricks from your daily quota.”
20  Then as they departed from Pharaoh, they met Moses and Aaron, who stood there to meet them.
## God Promises Israel's Deliverance
21  They said to them, “Let the Lord look on you and judge, because you have made us abhorrent in the sight of Pharaoh and in the sight of his servants, to put a sword in his hand to kill us.”
22  So Moses returned to the Lord and said, “O Lord, why have You brought trouble on this people? Why is it You sent me?
23  From the time I went to Pharaoh to speak in Your name, he has afflicted this people; neither have You delivered Your people at all.”
